3-basic-tools-for-developers.md, before:

# 3 basic tools for developers

As a developer, what software tools do you need?

Well, honestly? It depends on what you need.

But the most **basic** tools that I think are _required_, to get any productive and organized development done, boils down to 3.

3 tools that you really NEED and, only if you want to, can add more tools to.

## 1. Text editor

You might say that a text editor is truly the only _required_ tool to start developing.
And I have to agree. For 2 reasons:

1. Development often starts with adding and editing files in your project. So, you will need a text editor.
2. Some text editors are part of an IDE, which comes packed with all kinds of useful tools.

But let me ask: what is a text editor?

It sits in the name: something that can edit text.

So you can go all in and use an IDE like VSCode, PyCharm, or PHPStorm.
Or you can settle on a pre-installed text editor on your device.
Hey, if you really want to you can also use pen and paper.

Some developers want all the tooling they can get, so they go with an IDE.

But some others choose to use a more limited text editor with less features.
Why?

The reasons can vary of course.
Some might not want any extra help from an IDE or any Intellisense.
And this is a great technique for new developers that want to learn the syntax of a language.

And there is nothing stopping you from using both an IDE and a simpler text editor.

So what text editor you should use depends on **you**.
Your goals, your needs, and your preferences.

The terminal can also be used as a text editor, and that is the second tool I wanted to talk about.

## 2. The terminal

The terminal is a piece of software where you run commands.

These commands, or programs, can be software you made or someone else made.

You can do basic stuff like manipulating files and folders, and their contents.

You can also do more complex stuff like managing a projects dependencies.
Or debug, test, and build your projects.

I would say that whatever you can do in any GUI application, you can do with the terminal.
But using the terminal you have an endless amount of customization, and you can do a lot more.

Should you know everything there is to know about the terminal?
Only if you want to.

But I think it's an essential tool for any developer to at least know the basics.
At some point, it will cross your path.

Development demand structure, which brings us to the third tool.

## 3. Version control system

## Bonus: Documentation

Commit message:

Add version control system part

3-basic-tools-for-developers.md, after:

# 3 basic tools for developers

As a developer, what software tools do you need?

Well, honestly? It depends on what you need.

But the most **basic** tools that I think are _required_, to get any productive and organized development done, boils down to 3.

3 tools that you really NEED and, only if you want to, can add more tools to.

## 1. Text editor

You might say that a text editor is truly the only _required_ tool to start developing.
And I have to agree. For 2 reasons:

1. Development often starts with adding and editing files in your project. So, you will need a text editor.
2. Some text editors are part of an IDE, which comes packed with all kinds of useful tools.

But let me ask: what is a text editor?

It sits in the name: something that can edit text.

So you can go all in and use an IDE like VSCode, PyCharm, or PHPStorm.
Or you can settle on a pre-installed text editor on your device.
Hey, if you really want to you can also use pen and paper.

Some developers want all the tooling they can get, so they go with an IDE.

But some others choose to use a more limited text editor with less features.
Why?

The reasons can vary of course.
Some might not want any extra help from an IDE or any Intellisense.
And this is a great technique for new developers that want to learn the syntax of a language.

And there is nothing stopping you from using both an IDE and a simpler text editor.

So what text editor you should use depends on **you**.
Your goals, your needs, and your preferences.

The terminal can also be used as a text editor, and that is the second tool I wanted to talk about.

## 2. The terminal

The terminal is a piece of software where you run commands.

These commands, or programs, can be software you made or someone else made.

You can do basic stuff like manipulating files and folders, and their contents.

You can also do more complex stuff like managing a projects dependencies.
Or debug, test, and build your projects.

I would say that whatever you can do in any GUI application, you can do with the terminal.
But using the terminal you have an endless amount of customization, and you can do a lot more.

Should you know everything there is to know about the terminal?
Only if you want to.

But I think it's an essential tool for any developer to at least know the basics.
At some point, it will cross your path.

Development demand structure, which brings us to the third tool.

## 3. Version control system

How would you try to keep track of how your project change over time?

Maybe a change log? Would you have one for every file, or the entire project?
Would you save a modified file as a new one, prefixed with `-latest'?

The larger your project grow, this becomes more of an issue.
And we haven't even talked about collaboration or reverting changes.

These are problems that version control systems solves.

It's a software that keeps track of your projects history - every single change.

It also helps with smooth collaboration without conflicts.

In other words: it makes it super clear how you project evolves, and who contributed with what.

## Bonus: Documentation
